In Japan, the strawberry crop peaks in winter-the most immaculate ones selling for hundreds of dollars apiece to be given as special gifts. Changes in temperatures influence how sweet or acidic the berries taste.
PHOTOGRAPH BY NORIKO HAYASHI, THE NEW YORK TIMES/REDUX
ByCallie Radke Stevens
April 29, 2024




Under centuries-old oak trees in southwest Spain, black Iberian pigs snuffle at the ground. These pure-bred animals will eventually become jamon iberico, the cured ham known worldwide for its cultural significance and flavor.

Cinco Jotas is one of the most respected producers of this ham; the company raises 100 percent black Iberian pigs and only sells the ham under the government-regulated black label, the highest mark available for jamon iberico.

The time their pigs spend nosing around for acorns is essential to the ham's quality, flavor, and premium price tag. The acorns, meadows, and free-range lifestyle all create jamon iberico's signature flavor. But the increasing frequency of heat waves and droughts in the Iberian Peninsula, where a five-year drought is ongoing, mean lower yields of acorns and grasses.

Iberian pigs forage in the woods.

The pigs reared by Cinco Jotas will eventually become Jamon Iberico, a prized Spanish ham. Access to enough acorns and grasses creates the ham's signature flavor, but climate change is causing drought conditions that imperil the pigs' feed.
PHOTOGRAPH BY GUNNAR KNECHTEL, LAIF/REDUX
Without acorns and meadows, pigs would have to be cross-bred or given supplemental feed like cereals and would lose some of the color, aroma, and texture associated with the black-label ham. At Cinco Jotas, this is a big concern; oak trees take 30 years to produce acorns. Swapping for another food source high in oleic acid, like olives, would make the meat bitter and spicy.

"When you depend completely on natural resources, as we do, you're always thinking, looking, trying to predict how it is going to be. Because we depend on nature, we cannot grow it," says Maria Castro Bermudez-Coronel, the communications director at Cinco Jotas and a biologist who lives in the forests where the pigs forage.

Cinco Jotas isn't alone. Globally, the people who produce our food are contending with weather that has been destabilized by climate change.

And all of it is changing not only the quantity and quality of the foods we eat, but also the flavor itself.

Why things taste the way they do
To describe wine, sommeliers use the French term terroir to describe how environmental conditions like soil and climate affected the taste of wine grapes. But wine isn't the only food with terroir.

Kathryn De Master, an environmental resource scientist at University of California, Berkeley, explains that terrior is even more expansive than just the ecological components that go into the taste and quality of food. Terroir also encompasses the social practices that go into making a food, like the way Cinco Jotas' managers do everything in the curing process by hand, without machinery.

The term is fluid, though, because there are many factors that influence a food's terroir and end flavor.

Flavor, which is comprised of both aroma and taste, starts long before we dice, cure, and cook. When we taste something, we're reacting to specific chemical compounds. Identifying these chemicals has allowed us to make foods that contain tastes like strawberry flavoring, without harming any strawberries in the process.

Soil, fungi, temperature, moisture, shade-each plays a role. Even pests influence the way produce tastes, inducing certain plants to release more chemicals that attract the pests' predators or repel the insects themselves. By isolating the compounds, scientists are beginning to better understand the environmental factors that influence them.

For foods like meat and dairy, the plants the animals eat-and when and how they eat it-creates variations in fat, chemical compounds, and muscle.

You May Also Like

MAGAZINE
In a warming climate, we need to radically rethink how we conserve nature

ENVIRONMENT
Could billions of oysters protect us from the next big storm?

ENVIRONMENT
Climate change is hitting the heart of Cajun country-through its crawfish
The business of flavor
In North Carolina, Matt Schwab is thinking about flavor, too. Schwab is the owner and farmer at Hold Fast Oyster Co., which farms its oysters at two locations in the New River. The water there is brackish, a mix of salt and freshwater. But already, as sea levels rise and the salinity in the river increases, the two locations will become more similar in flavor.

"The oysters that are less briny, you can get more complexity in the flavor profile," Schwab says. "But as the salinity has gone up you kind of lose some of that more subtle flavor."

Other foods' flavor compounds are highly susceptible to moisture and temperature fluctuations.

Studies have shown that temperature has more impact on strawberry's sweetness or acidity than the method by which they are grown. Warm days and cool nights increase the fruit's sugar and acid content, both of which are needed for optimum flavor.

Similarly, temperature-driven early blooms and high temperature during maturation have both been shown to influence the flavor of apples in Japan. The acid level, fruit firmness, and water content all decreased, meaning the apples were less crisp and flavorful.

In Yunnan province in China, tea grown in a typical dry season has higher concentrations of the compounds that create high quality, flavorful tea, meaning the product has to be grown before the monsoons. Yet Yunnan is in the midst of extreme drought, which means it's harder to grow tea plants at all in the pre-monsoon season when the quality is highest.

Aerial view of a tea plantation in Pu er, Yunnan Province of China.

In China's Yunnan province, tea is grown during the dry season to ensure it has a high concentration of the compounds that imbue the best flavor.
PHOTOGRAPH BY DENG GUOHUI, VCG/ GETTY IMAGES
Women pick tea leaves from the misty hills.

The province is in the midst of an extreme drought, and some farmers have had to grow tea during the monsoon season as a result. Tea grown during this period is less flavorful and fetches a lower price.
PHOTOGRAPH BY CHRISTOPHER PILLITZ, GETTY IMAGES
Cheesemakers in both the United States and Europe are grappling with new flavors, too. In Italy, early research indicates that the quality of Bettelmatt cheese, which relies heavily on the alpine pastures where cows graze, is likely to decline. The government in France, where cheese is deeply embedded in culture, is even considering loosening the strict rules that govern its cheesemakers. These accommodations have become increasingly necessary as pastures and milking barns suffer in more extreme heat.

These changes in flavor have social repercussions; farmers who produce tea during the monsoon season make 30 to 50 percent less income because the leaves are lower quality and less flavorful. For Schwab, hotter, saltier water raises the risk of diseases and oyster mortality.

An unpredictable flavor future
It's not clear what the future of flavor is, especially for small producers. In North Carolina, Schwab is considering options like farming in deeper waters, which are less susceptible to changes in salinity and temperature. But that also means a completely different method of farming with completely different equipment.

Among the oak forests, Cinco Jotas staff are accustomed to thinking about how to preserve the breed. They've been producing ham since 1867, and there are references to cured ham as far back as the Roman Empire in the prose of Martial and a proclamation by Emperor Dicoletian.

Since 2014, researchers employed by Cinco Jotas have been studying a fungal-like disease that more effectively kills trees during prolonged periods of drought. Some trees are naturally more resistant, and Cinco Jotas wants to help those ones spread. Castro Bermudez-Coronel is hopeful that the old, massive trees, which has expansive root systems much more resilient than the grasses, will survive the climate changes.

"Nature adapts to everything," she says. "It will transform, but it will adapt. Nature always adapts to the new changes.


You actually can consume too much caffeine. Here are the risks.
Most people drink coffee and tea to help stay awake. But scientists warn against overconsumption-and that higher dosage caffeine drinks can lead to stress, lack of sleep, and even death.

Coffee splashing out of a clear mug.
How much caffeine is too much?
REBECCA HALE, NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC
ByDaryl Austin
March 08, 2024





A North American bakery-cafe restaurant chain is now facing two different wrongful death lawsuits from family members claiming a loved one died after drinking a beverage containing high quantities of caffeine.

The drink in question is a sugar-sweetened lemonade loaded with the stimulant. Though the exact amount of caffeine consumed in both instances is unconfirmed, both lawsuits allege that the 21-year-old female and the 46-year-old male each died shortly after drinking from a 30-ounce cup of the product that may have contained as much as 390 milligrams of caffeine and 124 grams of sugar, if ice wasn't used. For comparison, an eight-ounce cup of coffee contains 80 to 100 milligrams of caffeine, and a 12-ounce can of a Red Bull brand energy drink contains 114 milligrams of caffeine.

The amount of caffeine consumed in these cases matter because the stimulant can affect people in different ways, which is one reason nutritional scientists frequently warn against overconsumption.

"At very high doses, caffeine can be toxic or even lethal," says Rob van Dam, a professor of exercise and nutrition sciences at the Milken Institute School of Public Health at George Washington University.

But figuring out the quantity of caffeine in a food or beverage isn't always easy. Part of the issue is that caffeine isn't considered an additive when it occurs naturally such in coffee, tea, and chocolate.

In such foods, "you won't find 'caffeine' on the label," says Marilyn Cornelis, an associate professor of preventive medicine at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine. Instead, caffeine is only required to be listed as an ingredient in the United States when it has been added to certain products. Even then, there is no regulation requiring the disclosure of the exact amount of caffeine contained therein, Cornelis explains.

What is caffeine and how does it work?
Derived from the leaves, stem, fruit, or beans of coffee, tea, cacao, and guarana plants, caffeine is the most widely used central-nervous-system stimulant in the world. It's contained naturally in many plants and foods we eat and is also added in synthetic form to many products such as cola and energy beverages.

Caffeine is a member of a group of chemical compounds collectively known as methylxanthines, which are absorbed rapidly into the bloodstream and affect the central nervous system. They do this, in part, by binding with adenosine receptors throughout the brain and body.

Adenosine is a chemical that plays an important role in promoting sleep and helping the body feel tired. As adenosine rises through wakeful periods, it binds to its receptor, triggering sleepiness.

But because the caffeine molecule resembles adenosine, it can bind to receptors on the nerve cell, thereby preventing adenosine from doing so. Without adenosine signaling sleep, an individual remains awake and alert. This interference both speeds up the cell's activity and prevents it from slowing down the way adenosine would cause it to do.

What's more, research shows that caffeine also increases cortisol and epinephrine levels-two hormones associated with feelings of excitement, stress, and anxiousness.

The upside of caffeine
Due to such effects, caffeine can be a useful stimulant to increase mental alertness and reduce fatigue. It's also useful in maintaining performance for the sleep deprived and is used by U.S. Army soldiers for this purpose.

Some research shows that caffeine can also improve memory function and one's ability to concentrate. Long-term consumption has also been linked to a reduced risk of Parkinson's disease.

($1,500 for 'naturally refined' coffee? Here's what that phrase really means.)

Moderate consumption of coffee and tea may also improve cardiovascular health in some people, says van Dam, though he is quick to point out that any associated benefits are most likely due to other compounds in these beverages such as the antioxidant properties associated with chlorogenic acid and trigonelline, and not necessarily due to the drink's caffeine content.

"Overall, the health benefits of caffeine intake are relatively minor and not significant enough to encourage caffeine consumption," says Jennifer Temple, director of the nutrition and health research laboratory at the University at Buffalo. What's more, "any potential benefit could be offset by other components of the beverages, such as higher sugar intake."

Indeed, like the 124 grams of added sugars in the aforementioned super-caffeinated lemonade, many caffeinated beverages are frequently loaded with sugar.

You May Also Like

SCIENCE
Is chocolate actually good for you?

SCIENCE
How ultra-processed food harms the body and brain

SCIENCE
No food or medicine can do what olive oil can do. Here's why.
That's because, though manufacturers state that caffeine is added to "enhance the flavor" of their beverages, "caffeine is very bitter and actually makes it so more sugar or other sweetener has to be added to make these drinks palatable," says Temple.

The downsides of caffeine and risks of overconsumption
Beyond avoiding high quantities of sugars in many caffeinated beverages and the health problems that accompany them, it's also important to avoid overconsumption of caffeine itself.

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration recommends that healthy adults limit caffeine consumption to no more than 400 milligrams daily; equivalent to about four small cups of coffee.

"Healthy children and adolescents over the age of 12 can safely consume up to 100 milligrams of caffeine per day," says Temple. However, the effects of caffeine in this younger population are less studied than for adults, so "research targeting this demographic is in progress, fueled by increased concerns surrounding energy drink consumption," says Cornelis.

('A forest on caffeine'? How coffee can help forests grow faster)

Experts discourage caffeine consumption in children under age 12.

Though many adults tolerate amounts beyond these daily limits, there are harms associated with ingesting too much caffeine too frequently. These include poor sleep quality, shakiness, vomiting, fast heart rate, low potassium levels, irritability, headache, restlessness, and anxiety.

Studies show that caffeine can also be habit forming and has some long-term adverse effects. These include "an increased risk of hypertension, pre-diabetes, kidney disease and heart disease in some people who consume several cups of coffee per day," says Ahmed El-Sohemy, a professor of nutritional sciences at the University of Toronto.

Caffeine can be especially dangerous at very high levels.

The FDA warns that seizures may occur when one consumes as much as 1,200 milligrams of caffeine too quickly, something that can occur when one drinks too many super-caffeinated beverages, takes caffeine pills, or consumes the powdered form of the stimulant; a single teaspoon of which can contain the same amount of caffeine as 28 cups of coffee. "Pure and highly concentrated caffeine products present a significant public health threat and have contributed to at least two deaths in the United States," the health agency notes.

Who is most vulnerable?
There's also increased risk for people with certain medical conditions.

People with diabetes, for instance, should exercise caution when consuming caffeine as the stimulant has been shown to alter the way sugar is metabolized-lowering insulin sensitivity and increasing glucose concentration.

People with chronic liver disease may also be more sensitive to its effects "due to impaired ability to metabolize caffeine," says Adrienne Hughes, an emergency physician and medical toxicologist at Oregon Health and Science University. And the American Heart Association warns people with severe hypertension (blood pressure of 160/100 mm Hg or higher) to avoid drinking even modest amounts of caffeine, as just two or more cups of coffee per day has been associated "with twice the risk of death from cardiovascular disease" in such individuals.

Caffeine is also recommended against for people who feel heartburn frequently, especially in those who experience extreme acid reflux such as individuals diagnosed with GERD.

Expectant moms may also want to limit caffeine consumption because the stimulant has been shown to cause blood vessels in the placenta and uterus to constrict, which could reduce blood supply to the fetus and thereby inhibit growth.

"There is now substantial evidence that caffeine consumption by mothers during pregnancy may slow the growth of the fetus and even increase the risk of miscarriage," says van Dam.

Warning labels and regulations
Because of the risks associated with overconsumption, the nutritional scientists say companies ought to be more transparent about the quantity of caffeine contained in various products.

Regarding the wrongful death lawsuits, for instance, each alleges that, at the time, the "charged lemonade" beverage wasn't advertised as containing very high amounts of caffeine. Because of cases like these, van Dam says, "more can be done to ensure clear labeling of the amount of caffeine in beverages that are not obvious sources of caffeine."

This isn't as much of an issue with soft drinks, as laws in the U.S. don't allow any cola-type beverage to exceed a limit of 200 parts per million of caffeine (.02 percent), but laws and regulations change for energy drink brands such as Red Bull, Monster, and Rockstar.

"Energy drinks, which are highly caffeinated, are not regulated by the FDA as they are considered supplements and not beverages," says Temple. "This loophole allows energy drink companies to add as much caffeine as they want." Because of this, she believes there should be age limits on the purchase of all energy drinks. "Other countries have done this, but the United States has not."
