Schoolchildren harvest vegetables that they grew and will cook and eat as part of a program designed to inspire a deeper appreciation of the environment.
PHOTOGRAPH BY CORY RICHARDS, NAT GEO IMAGE COLLECTION
ByMeryl Davids Landau
October 19, 2023

7 min read




When your mother told you to eat your vegetables, she was on to more than she knew. For the sake of our bodies and the Earth's climate, experts say people across the world need to make roots, beans, leafy greens, and other plant foods a bigger part of our diets.

"We're not saying go vegan. But significant changes can happen from shifting away from meat and towards plants," says Richard Waite, an expert on food climate policy at the nonprofit World Resources Institute. The process of growing and transporting food accounts for a quarter of all global greenhouse gas emissions, he stresses, and the majority of this comes from meat and dairy.

(Related: Why don't more people go vegan? It could be the label.)

Fortunately, plant-based meals are delicious. And they are better for our health. Long-term consumption of red meat has been associated with increased risks of cardiovascular disease, cancer, and type 2 diabetes. By contrast, vegetable-based eating is linked to lower rates of these and other diseases.

Even intensive carnivores can find this way of eating enjoyable, says Victoria Moran, host of the Main Street Vegan podcast and author of a book by the same name. Incorporating more plants in your diet isn't difficult, she insists. "The most colorful, delicious, and inviting foods are the plant foods," she says. "This is not a sacrifice. This is an adventure."

Here are some ways to get started.

Begin by blending and swapping
Dishes like hamburgers, meatloaf, sausages, and dumplings benefit when savory mushrooms or other plant proteins are blended into the meat, in a ratio of approximately one-third plants to two-thirds animal, says Sophie Attwood, a senior behavioral scientist at WRI who is working with the food-service industry to add more plant items to their menus.

"This isn't watering down, the way adding breadcrumbs might be," Attwood says. This mixture results in good flavor, texture, and mouthfeel, according to a study where diners evaluated blended carne asadas and tacos.

Similarly, carrots can replace some of the cheese in a mac and cheese dinner. Slice a few carrots thinly and saute them in water until tender. Then puree them with soy or nut milk and add it to the pasta before sprinkling on (less) cheese.

Since familiarity drives much of what we choose to eat, it helps to tweak your favorite dishes. In many recipes, beans, nuts and/or vegetables can be substituted for beef or chicken. Moran frequently makes a vegan "meatloaf" that reminds her of her grandmother's, replacing the chopped meat with a mixture of rice, mushrooms, walnuts, and wheat germ. Similarly, a hearty lasagna or chili can feature black beans, while lunchtime wraps might swap deli turkey for a soy product like seitan or baked extra firm tofu.

When vegan cook Tabitha Brown, author of Cooking from the Spirit, first started eating this way, she often hewed close to home, by creating country-style steaks using packaged vegetarian burgers mixed with mushrooms and onions and fried "fish" sticks from hearts of palm. Especially when seasonings and sauces are familiar-gravy in the first case, tartar sauce in the second-people tend not to miss the meat, she notes in her cookbook.

You May Also Like

SCIENCE
Your body needs whole grains. Here's how to find the most effective ones.

SCIENCE
How ultra-processed food harms the body and brain

SCIENCE
Don't trash the peels! The skins of fruits and veggies pack a nutritional punch
Make vegetables the star
According to the United Nations, more than 2,000 plants are available as food, but most of us eat just 30 common crops. And while we tend to think of red and white meats as protein powerhouses, many plant foods are too.

By expanding our horizons beyond conventional side dishes like baked potatoes or steamed broccoli, food can be interesting and tasty. "It really helps to think more about what you're adding than what you're subtracting," Moran says.

"Vegetables are a lot more diverse than meat, and you can do a lot more with them," Attwood says. There are root crops like beets, carrots, celery root, and the parsnip-like skirret. Cruciferous options include cabbage and watercress. Starchy vegetables range from corn and sweet potatoes to butternut squash, and turnips. There are nightshades like eggplants and tomatoes as well as leaner Japanese eggplants and numerous kinds of peppers. Leafy greens go beyond romaine and spinach to include kale, mustard greens, and more.

Incorporating a range of colors in each vegetable dish offers a cue to your taste buds that the item will be flavorful, the World Resources Institute has found. Harmony and symmetry also matter, so disperse vegetables throughout the plate and consider cutting carrots or other produce into interesting shapes.

Vary texture, color, and shape
Salads are an easy vegetarian dish to make since everyone is familiar, Moran says. But rather than tossing a few grape tomatoes onto a small plate of romaine lettuce, break out a huge bowl and get creative. "Start with a base that is meaningful," Moran says, such as a mixture of massaged kale, arugula, and baby spring leaves or whatever leafy greens you enjoy. "After that you want to make it fun," she says.

Include vegetables of various colors, shapes, and tastes, from sweet peppers to pungent radishes. Add additional texture with raisins, avocados, nuts, and/or seeds. In colder months, you can warm up a salad by tossing in a few cooked vegetables like sauteed mushrooms or winter squash and/or beans or seared tempeh made from fermented soy.

Bowls filled with cooked plant foods can be almost as simple to put together, Moran says. Instead of lettuce the base here is typically a cooked grain like rice or quinoa, which is topped with steamed or sauteed vegetables and beans then drizzled with a sauce like pesto or teriyaki. Serving this in a bowl rather than on a plate allows the flavors to meld, she says.

So many types of cooked dishes can be made with plant foods, whether that's stir-fries, soups, stews, or more creative entrees like Brown's vegetable stuffed bell peppers or her veggie pizzas made in portobello mushroom caps.

Incorporating herbs and spices is another great way to add flavor and nutrition. These plant parts possess a range of tannins, alkaloids, flavonoids, and polyphenols, which give them antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, glucose-lowering, and other health-promoting properties.

Better for the planet
If the world is to reach climate warming targets of 1.5 degrees Celsius, more of us need to gravitate to plants, Waite says. By 2050, the Earth's population is expected to reach nearly 10 billion people and require 56 percent more food to be produced than today. In the same timeframe, greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture and associated land clearings must be reduced by two-thirds. Shifting from fossil fuel burning to renewable energy won't be enough without concurrent changes in how we eat.

Some meat eaters worry that a plant-based diet will leave them perpetually hungry, but this need not be the case, Moran says. By including bulky foods like grains, beans, and starchy vegetables along with healthy fats like nuts, seeds, oils, and avocados, "you won't feel like something's missing," she says.

"We owe it to one another and to the planet to be moving in this direction," Moran says. "You can start today. You can start right now."


Photographed in a studio, these intertwined wavy caps of Psilocybe cyanescens are among the many species of psychedelic mushrooms found along the west coast of North America.
PHOTOGRAPH BY PHYLLIS MA
ByLangdon Cook
March 12, 2024




Two years ago, medical researchers taking a close look at cancer cells announced they had found a strange and surprising neighbor: fungi. But these fungi didn't just live near tumors-they offered clues about how deadly the cancer might be. Candida yeasts associated with colon cancer were predictive of metastatic growth, while with gastrointestinal cancer, they correlated with poor survival rates.

It's still too early to know if the fungi fuel the disease or if the disease is somehow incubating the fungi. But at the very least, these discoveries hint that there may be a new way to diagnose people earlier and better understand their prognosis.

"Initially, we were astounded," says Iliyan Iliev, an immunologist at Weill Cornell Medicine in New York and one of the researchers who made the fungi-cancer connection. In addition to Candida, his team found several other fungal species that were associated with the disease, such as Blastomyces in lung cancer and Malassezia, a variety of yeast, tied to breast cancer.

(Here's the guidance on lung cancer and breast cancer screenings.)

Something looking like a mixture of beans and grains.

Viewed with a scanning electron microscope in this color-enhanced photo, Candida albicans is found in the human gut, or more  specifically the mycobiome. At high levels, it may  be linked to conditions like irritable bowel syndrome.
PHOTOGRAPH BY MARTIN OEGGERLI, MYCOLOGY, AND PATHOLOGY, UNIVERSITY HOSPITAL BASEL AND SWISS NANOSCIENCE INSTITUTE, BASEL
Part of that surprise, for many, might be because of another link between fungi and our health. Medicinal mushrooms are sold throughout the world in various forms, from tinctures and capsules to powders and teas. They sustain a $30 billion business that's expected to double by 2032, in part because of their cancer-fighting association.

Even so, researchers are still at an early stage of understanding the true benefits of medicinal mushrooms. In 2022, scientists in India and Belgium published a comprehensive survey of peer-reviewed literature on the topic. While at least 32 species showed promise, according to the report, only around a dozen had been clinically tested for their potentially therapeutic properties.

"Mushrooms produce a wide range of chemicals not readily found in other organisms," says Walter Luyten, a professor emeritus at the Belgian university KU Leuven who contributed to the report. Some of these naturally derived compounds interact with the immune system to, as the report notes, "exhibit potent antitumor activity," meaning they might slow the growth of certain cancers or even keep them from forming. Species such as reishi (Ganoderma lucidum) and maitake (Grifola frondosa), to name just two, have shown promise in clinical studies.

(Cancer vaccines are showing promise. Here's how they work.)

Crystals looking like a pine needles.

Man in lab coat holding conical flask in blue lighted room.

Magic mushrooms-but hold the mushroom. Medicinal chemist Alex Sherwood prepares to isolate psilocybin hydrate crystals at the Usona Institute, a U.S.-based medical research organization. These macroscopic needle-like crystals spring from psilocybin molecules as they begin to cool ov.Read More
PHOTOGRAPH BY MICHAEL CHRISTOPHER BROWN (LEFT) AND PHOTOGRAPH BY MICHAEL CHRISTOPHER BROWN (RIGHT)
Though mushrooms are vastly understudied, Luyten and his team called them "one of the best gifts of nature for new . pharmaceuticals," if we can better understand them.

This is the paradox of medicinal fungi: It's a mysterious realm that could help or hurt us. Understanding this difference, and how best to harness what we're learning, hinges on exploring a broader frontier called the mycobiome.

Your body is certainly no stranger to good or bad fungi. The yeast in your stomach that helps regulate digestion? That's a good thing. The fungal infection on your skin that causes athlete's foot? Not so much. Among the trillions of tiny microbes that live on or inside each of us in a delicate balance, there are bacteria, viruses, and single-celled protozoans, all of which are part of what's known as your microbiome. Fungi are also included in that universe, but in recent years researchers have assigned them a separate designation- the mycobiome-in recognition that these organisms work quite differently.

(Humans are not prepared for a pandemic caused by fungal infections.)

Siew Ng, director of the Microbiota I-Center at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, says our body's fungal community is a "small but crucial component" of the gastrointestinal microbiome in particular. But while gut fungi such as Candida, Saccharomyces, and Cladosporium are all fundamental to our health, they have also been linked to diseases. Candida, for instance, can overpopulate and cause dysbiosis, a disorder associated with many health issues, including colorectal cancer. In other words, good fungi can become too successful and run amok, and turn into bad fungi.

The chemical formulas handwritten on glass lit with blue light from behind.

In a lab at the Usona Institute, chemists working to create synthetic psilocybin, among other projects, leave behind detailed notes, chemical ideas, and mechanisms on a fume hood window.
PHOTOGRAPH BY MICHAEL CHRISTOPHER BROWN
For Deepak Saxena, a microbiologist at New York University, the life-altering question is simple: Why do some fungi inhabit tumors? Saxena's research group was the first to identify fungi in pancreatic cancer, finding in 2019 that a Malassezia yeast can migrate from the small intestine to the pancreas and inhabit cancer cells. Saxena hypothesizes that the fungi's presence in the pancreas might be because of either immunosuppression or some other kind of altered environment that tumors help create. In lab experiments with mice, Saxena has seen the use of antifungal treatments arrest tumor progression, although plenty of research has shown that what works in mice often isn't directly transferable to humans.

For mushroom experts, it's not as simple as using one thing to treat another either. Ng says that traditional varietals like reishi and turkey tail (Trametes versicolor) have immune-boosting properties that have been shown to enhance the efficacy of chemotherapy. Numerous studies also indicate that many mushroom species do, in fact, contain anticancer compounds, including biologically active carbohydrates and terpenes that stimulate the immune system. Still, there are questions about what dose is most effective and whether any of these would work as a stand-alone treatment.

(The fungus in 'The Last of Us' is a real medicine-and it's very, very expensive.)

Hands in gloves holding petri dish and peice of sample from it in tweezer.

Seven petri dishes with peas are inoculated with different varieties of the fungus.

Biologists at Utrecht University attempt to create a new generation of tempeh, a traditional Indonesian food created by fermenting soybeans. Using yellow peas, the biologists inoculate the legumes with several varieties of Aspergillus oryzae, a fungus which is also used in sake production, and.Read More
PHOTOGRAPH BY MICHAEL CHRISTOPHER BROWN (LEFT) AND PHOTOGRAPH BY MICHAEL CHRISTOPHER BROWN (RIGHT)
In the meantime, there are no mushroom-based cancer drugs or immunity boosters on the market today that have been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. That makes any mushroom-related remedy sold over the counter with health claims essentially "try at your own risk."

For some people, however, that seemingly untapped potential has led them to seek another kind of guidance.

On an overcast day this past October near Port Angeles, Washington, Robert Rogers tromped through a shady, wooded area followed by a dozen intrepid foragers who had signed up for his specially guided tour as part of the annual Olympic Peninsula Fungi Festival. He pointed to a fan-shaped fungus the size of a half-dollar growing on a decayed nurse log. Its earthen-hued bands resembled the plumage of a game bird. This is what turkey tail looks like in the wild, he told the crowd.

(Want to try foraging food? Here's how to do it safely.)

Woman holding a tray with psychedelic mushrooms under the wall with framed pictures of mushrooms and live orchids.

The granddaughter of a licensed traditional herbal doctor, Ophelia Chong, pictured here with a batch of functional mushrooms, began cultivating fungi in Los Angeles nine years ago for personal medicinal and culinary use.
PHOTOGRAPH BY MICHAEL CHRISTOPHER BROWN
Rogers isn't a doctor. He's a self-described clinical herbalist and the author of The Fungal Pharmacy, a field guide to identifying mushrooms and lichens with purported health benefits. And he's one of many ad hoc enthusiasts who have compiled research about incorporating fungi into everyday health routines, often as a preventive measure. Most commonly consumed mushrooms-even the ubiquitous grocery store button-have phytonutrients beneficial to our health. When it comes to cancer, however, medicinal fungi such as turkey tail are not exactly assassins. "They don't kill cancer cells on sight," he explains. "They encourage the immune system to do the job."

Human hand releasing substance from dropper into jar of liquid.

Chong injects live mushroom tissue into a liquid culture of water mixed with honey, dextrose, or malt extract. (Sugar feeds the devel.Read More
PHOTOGRAPH BY MICHAEL CHRISTOPHER BROWN
More specifically, Ng says, turkey tail has been shown to increase the production of cytokines, which aid the body's cellular response to fighting a foreign pathogen or tumor. Used traditionally for centuries, a chemical from the mushroom has been the focus of more than four dozen clinical trials to date.

(Turkey tail. Chaga. Lion's mane. Do these mushroom supplements really help you?)

As for the connection between fungi and cancer cells, Iliev concedes that he initially considered it to be "biologically improbable," but he's since shifted toward "cautious optimism" about unraveling more mysteries of the mycobiome. In another recent study, researchers at NYU, including Saxena, found that there are 20 distinct types of fungi that may someday be useful in distinguishing between people with cancer and those without, pushing forward the idea that early testing of fungi might pave the way for better diagnoses and treatment.

Compare the potential advances of medicinal fungi to the advent of penicillin. One of the great fungi-based infection fighters of the modern age, it was discovered accidentally nearly a century ago, after a physician let mold grow in a petri dish of Staphylococcus bacteria. Who knows what other connections we might find now that we've started looking?

Whole grain foods such as oatmeal are linked to numerous health benefits, including a reduced risk of cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes.
PHOTOGRAPH BY BHOFACK2, GETTY IMAGES
ByJanis Jibrin
December 14, 2023

9 min read


Grains might get the snub from the keto and paleo crowds, but they're warmly embraced by nutrition scientists-especially whole grains.

Whole wheat, oats, brown rice, and other whole grains are linked to a reduced risk of cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes, obesity, constipation, and certain types of cancer. They are rich in fiber, vitamins, minerals, healthy fats, and phytonutrients, which are antioxidants or molecules with other protective qualities. And some choices are even healthier than others. But identifying those healthy choices takes a little grocery store sleuthing.

"We should be eating more whole grains. Americans barely consume one serving daily when we should be at three or more," says Joanne Slavin, a professor in the food science and nutrition department at the University of Minnesota, Twin Cities. "The Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommend that at least half our grains should be whole grains, but we're not there yet either." Much of her research has been devoted to whole grain nutrition.

Whole vs. refined grains
A whole grain is a seed that grows into the corn, wheat, oats, or other grains we put on the table.

It has three parts: The outer bran layer; the middle endosperm, which comprises most of the grain; and a small germ. If these three components exist in a food in the same proportions as in the intact grain, it's considered "whole grain," according to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). (Food manufacturers may add the three components separately to products for texture, taste, or other reasons.)

Light micrograph of a wheat grain, the seed of the wheat plant

A light micrograph of a grain of wheat. Whole grains contain an embryo-a fertilized ovule from which a new plant can grow (deep red, left)-a supply of food called the endosperm (red/blue, right), and an outer lay.Read More
MICROGRAPH BY DR KEITH WHEELER, SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY
Top view of various types of oats arranged in vertical strips, showing whole oat grains, oat flakes, oat bran and oat meal/flour.

A view of oats arranged from whole to increasingly milled and processed versions: whole oat grains, oat flakes, oat bran, and meal/flour.
PHOTOGRAPH BY CARLOSGAW, GETTY IMAGES
While some fringe wellness sites claim that grains are relatively new foods that our bodies aren't evolutionarily equipped to handle, archeological evidence from late Neanderthals shows we've been eating whole grains for about 50,000 years. But it's been just about 150 years since we began eating refined grains, which occurred after the invention of the roller mill, a device that removes the bran and germ.

what makes whole grains so protective?
When whole grains are processed, the bran and germ are discarded and you toss out fiber, vitamins, minerals, phytonutrients, and healthy fats. What remains is the endosperm-starch-with some protein and little else.

Thiamin, as well as other B vitamins and iron are added back to the "enriched rice" and "enriched flour" sold in the U.S. and other countries.

"But there's a lot we don't add back such as phytonutrients, or potassium and magnesium-two minerals Americans aren't getting enough of. They help regulate blood pressure as well as muscle and nerve function. Magnesium is also part of our bone structure," Slavin says.

Another major fallout of refining: Loss of dietary fiber. There are three grams (g) of fiber in a cup of fresh corn kernels; but not even one gram in a cup of corn flakes, which is made with refined corn flour. Whole wheat pasta has more than double the fiber of regular.

Fiber-rich diets are linked to a slew of health benefits, such as a 15 to 30 percent lower risk of coronary heart disease (clogged arteries to the heart), stroke, type 2 diabetes, constipation, and colorectal cancer compared to low fiber diets. Higher fiber intake may also offer protection against depression and obesity. It's even linked to a lower risk of death-from heart disease, stroke, or any cause.

"Fiber helps us all along the digestive tract, starting with the mouth. High fiber foods take longer to chew, and when you slow down eating, you might take in fewer calories, which helps keep body weight down," Slavin explains. "It helps prevent constipation, and in the large intestine, fiber is fuel for beneficial gut bacteria." These bacteria produce short chain fatty acids which are linked to lower risk of colorectal cancer and can tamp down inflammation-a root cause of many chronic diseases.

But only 4 percent of Americans meet the fiber guidelines; lack of whole grains might be the main reason, notes Slavin.

whole grains and the glycemic index
Some whole grain foods have another thing going for them: A low glycemic index (GI). This is a 1 to 100 ranking of carbohydrate-rich foods based on their effect on blood sugar. For the same number of grams, a low GI carbohydrate food (1 - 55) triggers a relatively small rise in blood sugar, a medium GI food (56 - 69) raises blood sugar further, and a high GI food (70-plus) even higher.


